[docs] Document charts composition (#10710)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/charts/composition/composition.md

---
title: React Chart composition
githubLabel: 'component: charts'
packageName: '@mui/x-charts'
---

# Chart composition

<p class="description">How to create advanced custom charts.</p>

## Overview

The `@mui/x-charts` follows an architecture based on context providers.
The overall idea is to pass your series and axes definitions to a single component, the `<ChartContainer />`.

> This component will transform those data to simplify the rendering, and provide them to its children.

Author: ```suggestion
This component will transform data and provide them to its children.
```

> Based on the data provided by the container, you can render some graphical element with our subcomponents.

Author: ```suggestion
Based on the data provided by the container, you can render some graphical elements with provided subcomponents.
```

> Such as `<LinePlot />`, `<ChartsYAxis />`. Or you can create your [own subcomponents](/x/react-charts/components/)

Author: ```suggestion
Such as `<LinePlot />`, `<ChartsYAxis />`.
Or you can create your [own subcomponents](/x/react-charts/components/).
```

## Container

### Responsive

> You have access to two containers.

Author: ```suggestion
There are two containers.
```

The `<ChartContainer />` and `<ResponsiveChartContainer />`.
As you can guess the only difference is the responsiveness.

The first one requires to provide `width` and `height` props.
Whereas the second one will compute undefined dimension based on the size of its parent element.

:::warning
The parent element should have intrinsic dimensions.

> If the parents dimension relies on its content, the responsive charts will not render.

Author: ```suggestion
If the parent dimension relies on its content, the responsive charts will not render.
```

:::

> The next demo allows switching between a chart using `<ChartContainer />` with `width` and `height` props set to 500 and 300,

Author: ```suggestion
The next demo allows switching between a chart using `<ChartContainer />` with `width` (resp. `height`) props set to 500 (resp. 300),
```

and a chart using `<ResponsiveChartContainer />`.

{{"demo": "BasicComposition.js" }}

### Properties

The chart container get all props that are not specific to a single graphical element.

> This includes:

Author: ```suggestion
It includes:
```

- The `xAxis` and `yAxis` props. More information in the [axis page](/x/react-charts/axis/).
- The `colors` prop as defined in the [color palette page](/x/react-charts/styling/#color-palette).
- The `series` and `dataset`.

The `series` prop is an array of series definitions.

> You can find explanation about each specific time of series in their respective docs page: [line](/x/react-charts/lines/), [bar](/x/react-charts/bars/), [pie](/x/react-charts/pie/).

Author: ```suggestion
You can find explanations about each specific type of series in their respective docs page: [line](/x/react-charts/lines/), [bar](/x/react-charts/bars/), [pie](/x/react-charts/pie/).
```

> When using a single components chart, the library can guess which kind of series you are defining.

Author: ```suggestion
When using a single component chart, the library can guess which kind of series you are defining.
```

> For example if you use `<BarChart />` the component assumes that `series` will be of type `'bar'`.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, if you use `<BarChart />` the component assumes that `series` will have type `'bar'`.
```

> The chart container can't do such a guess.

Author: ```suggestion
With composition, the chart container can't do such a guess.
```

So you have to add an additional property `type`.

> It indicates the type of charts you are defining.

Author: ```suggestion
It indicates the type of charts you are defining with this series.
```

```jsx
<BarChart series={[{
    data: [1, 2, 3] // No need to specify it is a bar series
}]} />

<ChartContainer
  series={[
    { data: [1, 2, 3], type: 'bar' }, // We need to specify this is for bar chart
    { data: [3, 2, 1], type: 'line' } // We need to specify this is for line chart
  ]}
>
  <BarPlot /> {/* Will only display series with type: 'bar'*/}
  <LinePlot /> {/* Will only display series with type: 'line'*/}
</ChartContainer>
```

> Those series can use the `dataset` props [the same way](/x/react-charts/bars/#using-a-dataset) single component chart does

Author: ```suggestion
Those series can use the `dataset` props [the same way](/x/react-charts/bars/#using-a-dataset) single component chart does.
```

In the next demo, the chart is made by composition with subcomponents `<BarPlot />` and `<LinePlot />`.

> My modifying series `type` property, you can switch between a line and bar rendering.

Author: ```suggestion
By modifying the series `type` property, you can switch between a line and bar rendering.
```

```jsx
<ResponsiveChartContainer
  series={[
    { type, data: [1, 2, 3, 2, 1] },
    { type, data: [4, 3, 1, 3, 4] },
  ]}
>
  <BarPlot />
  <LinePlot />
  <ChartsXAxis label="X axis" position="bottom" axisId="x-axis-id" />
</ResponsiveChartContainer>
```

{{"demo": "SwitchSeriesType.js" }}

## Subcomponents

### Plotting

To display data, you have components named `<XxxPlot />` such as `<LinePlot />`, `<AreaPlot />`, `<MarkPlot />`, `<BarPlot />`, ...

### Axis

To add axis, you can use `<ChartsXAxis />` and `<ChartsYAxis />` as defined in the [axis page](/x/react-charts/axis/#composition).

> It takes a `axisId` to know which one of the axes defined in the container you want to render. If not provided it will pick the first one.

Author: ```suggestion
It takes an `axisId` to know which one of the axes is defined in the container you want to render.
If not provided it will pick the first axis definition.
```

### Additional information

To add a legend to your chart, you can use `<ChartsLegend />`.

Most of the props are explained in the [legend page](/x/react-charts/legend/).

> Instead of using `slotProps` you can directly pass props to it.

Author: ```suggestion
Most of the demos use `slotProps`.
But with composition, you can directly pass props to it.
```

```jsx
// With single component chart
<BarChart
  slotProps={{
    legend: {
      direction: 'row',
    }
  }}
/>

// With composition
<ChartContainer>

>   <ChartsLegend directio='row' />

Author: ```suggestion
  <ChartsLegend direction='row' />
```

---
title: React Chart composition
githubLabel: 'component: charts'
packageName: '@mui/x-charts'
---

# Chart composition

<p class="description">How to create advanced custom charts.</p>

## Overview

The `@mui/x-charts` follows an architecture based on context providers.
The overall idea is to pass your series and axes definitions to a single component, the `<ChartContainer />`.
This component will transform data and provide them to its children.

Based on the data provided by the container, you can render some graphical elements with provided subcomponents.
Such as `<LinePlot />`, `<ChartsYAxis />`.
Or you can create your [own subcomponents](/x/react-charts/components/).

## Container

### Responsive

There are two containers.
The `<ChartContainer />` and `<ResponsiveChartContainer />`.

> As you can guess the only difference is the responsiveness.

Author: Sam proposed i middle ground with "As the names suggest"

> As you can guess the only difference is the responsiveness.

Reviewer: Sound great! 👏 💯

Whereas the second one will compute the undefined dimension based on the size of its parent element.

:::warning
The parent element should have intrinsic dimensions.
If the parent dimension relies on its content, the responsive charts will not render.
:::

The next demo allows switching between a chart using `<ChartContainer />` with `width` (resp. `height`) props set to 500 (resp. 300),
and a chart using `<ResponsiveChartContainer />`.

{{"demo": "BasicComposition.js" }}

### Properties

The chart container gets all props that are not specific to a single graphical element.
It includes:

- The `xAxis` and `yAxis` props. More information in the [axis page](/x/react-charts/axis/).
- The `colors` prop as defined in the [color palette page](/x/react-charts/styling/#color-palette).
- The `series` and `dataset`.

#### Series

The `series` prop is an array of series definitions.
You can find an explanation about each specific series type in their respective docs page: [line](/x/react-charts/lines/), [bar](/x/react-charts/bars/), [pie](/x/react-charts/pie/).

When using a single components chart, the library can guess which kind of series you are defining.

> For example, if you use `<BarChart />` the component assumes that `series` will be of type `'bar'`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you use `<BarChart />` the component assumes that `series` will be of `'bar'` type.
```

With composition, the chart container can't do such a guess.

> So you have to add the property `type`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So you have to add the `type` property.
```

It indicates the type of charts you are defining with this series.

```jsx
<BarChart series={[{
    data: [1, 2, 3] // No need to specify it is a bar series
}]} />

<ChartContainer
  series={[

>     { data: [1, 2, 3], type: 'bar' }, // We need to specify this is for bar chart

Reviewer: Consider avoiding the `We` usage. 🤔 
```suggestion
    { data: [1, 2, 3], type: 'bar' }, // This series is for the bar chart
```

>     { data: [3, 2, 1], type: 'line' } // We need to specify this is for line chart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    { data: [3, 2, 1], type: 'line' } // This series is for the line chart
```

  ]}
>
  <BarPlot /> {/* Will only display series with type: 'bar'*/}
  <LinePlot /> {/* Will only display series with type: 'line'*/}
</ChartContainer>
```

> Those series can use the `dataset` props [the same way](/x/react-charts/bars/#using-a-dataset) single component chart does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those series can use the `dataset` prop [the same way](/x/react-charts/bars/#using-a-dataset) single component chart does.
```

> In the next demo, the chart is made by composition with subcomponents `<BarPlot />` and `<LinePlot />`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next demo, the chart is made by composing the `<BarPlot />` and `<LinePlot />` components.
```

By modifying the series `type` property, you can switch between a line and bar rendering.

```jsx
<ResponsiveChartContainer
  series={[
    { type, data: [1, 2, 3, 2, 1] },
    { type, data: [4, 3, 1, 3, 4] },
  ]}
>
  <BarPlot />
  <LinePlot />
  <ChartsXAxis label="X axis" position="bottom" axisId="x-axis-id" />
</ResponsiveChartContainer>
```

{{"demo": "SwitchSeriesType.js" }}

## Subcomponents

### Plotting

> To display data, you have components named `<XxxPlot />` such as `<LinePlot />`, `<AreaPlot />`, `<MarkPlot />`, `<BarPlot />`, ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To display data, you have components named `<XxxPlot />` such as `<LinePlot />`, `<AreaPlot />`, `<MarkPlot />`, `<BarPlot />`, etc.
```

### Axis

To add axes, you can use `<ChartsXAxis />` and `<ChartsYAxis />` as defined in the [axis page](/x/react-charts/axis/#composition).

It takes an `axisId` prop that indicates which axis defined in the container should be rendered.

> If not provided it will pick the first one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `axisId` is not provided it will pick the first one.
```

### Additional information

To add a legend to your chart, you can use `<ChartsLegend />`.

Most of the props are explained in the [legend page](/x/react-charts/legend/).
The demonstrations use the `slotProps.legend` object.
But with composition, you can directly pass props to `<ChartsLegend />`.

```jsx
// With single component chart
<BarChart
  slotProps={{
    legend: {
      direction: 'row',
    }
  }}
/>

// With composition
<ChartContainer>

>   <ChartsLegend direction='row' />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <ChartsLegend direction="row" />
```

</ChartContainer>
```

### Interaction

You can also add interaction elements such as `<ChartsAxisHighlight />` and `<ChartsTooltip />`.

:::info
By default the container is listening to mouse events to keep track of where the mouse is in the chart.

> If you don't use the axis highlight or the tooltip, consider disabling this feature with `disableAxisListener` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not using the axis highlight or the tooltip, consider disabling this feature with the `disableAxisListener` prop.
```
